Atoms are the building blocks that come together through chemical bonding to form molecules in the universe. In this model of a molecule, the atoms of carbon (black), hydrogen (white), nitrogen (blue), oxygen (red), and sulfur (yellow) are in proportional atomic size. The silver rods indicate chemical bonds that hold the atoms together in a specific three-dimensional shape. (credit: modification of work by Christian Guthier).  The elements carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, sulfur, and phosphorus are the key building blocks found in all living things. Elements are unique forms of matter with specific chemical and physical properties that cannot be broken down into simpler substances by ordinary chemical processes. They form the carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, and nucleic acids which are the fundamental components of all organisms. In this chapter, we will discuss how the unique properties of atoms allow them to interact and form the molecules of life.  At its most fundamental level, life is made up of matter. Matter is any substance that occupies space and has mass. Elements are unique forms of matter with specific chemical and physical  properties that cannot be broken down into simpler substances by ordinary chemical reactions. There are 118 elements, but only 98 occur naturally. The remaining elements are unstable and require scientists to synthesize them in laboratories.  Each element is typically designated by a single capital letter, or two letters if the first letter is already “taken” (Figure 2.2). Some elements follow the English term for the element, such as C for carbon and Ca for calcium. Other elements’ chemical symbols are derived from their Latin names. For example, the symbol for sodium is Na, referring to natrium, the Latin word for sodium.  The four elements common to all living organisms are oxygen (O), carbon (C), hydrogen (H), and nitrogen (N). Some elements common to all living organisms are relatively rare on the earth as a whole, as Table 2.1 shows. For example, the atmosphere is rich in nitrogen and oxygen but contains very little carbon and hydrogen. The earth’s crust contains oxygen and a small amount of hydrogen but has little nitrogen and carbon. In spite of their differences in abundance, all elements obey the same chemical and physical laws.  Organisms cannot make elements; they must come from the environment. An example of an element that humans must take in is calcium (Ca). When you consume dairy products, calcium is absorbed and used for many processes, including strengthening bones, cell division, muscle contraction, and nervous system function. The elements in the human body are shown in Figure 2.3, beginning with the most abundant: oxygen (O), carbon (C), hydrogen (H), and nitrogen (N). Trace elements are also important to the body but in much lower quantities. Iodine, which is a trace element, is required to make thyroid hormone, an important hormone that regulates body metabolism. Trace element deficiencies will lead to homeostatic imbalances within the body.  The Structure of the Atom To understand how elements come together, we must first discuss the element's smallest component or building block, the atom. An atom is the smallest unit of matter that retains all the chemical properties of the element. For example, one gold atom has all the properties of gold, such as being a solid metal at room temperature. A gold coin is simply a very large number of gold atoms molded into the shape of a coin and contains small amounts of other elements known as impurities. We cannot break gold atoms down into anything smaller while still retaining the properties of gold.  An atom is composed of two regions. The center of the atom, which is called the nucleus, contains subatomic particles called protons and neutrons. The atom's outermost region holds subatomic particles known as electrons. Electrons orbit around the nucleus, as Figure 2.4. illustrates. All atoms, except hydrogen, contain protons, electrons, and neutrons. Most hydrogen atoms contain only one proton and one electron and have no neutrons.  Atoms are made up of protons and neutrons located within the nucleus, and electrons surrounding the nucleus.   Protons and neutrons have approximately the same mass, about 1.67 × 10-24 grams. Scientists arbitrarily define this amount of mass as one atomic mass unit (amu). Although similar in mass, protons and neutrons differ in their electrical charge. A proton is positively charged; whereas, a neutron is uncharged (Table 2.2). The number of neutrons in an atom contributes significantly to its mass, but not to its charge. Electrons are much smaller in mass than protons or neutrons, weighing only 9.11 × 10-28 grams. As a result, electrons do not contribute significantly to an element’s overall atomic mass. When calculating atomic mass, it is customary to ignore the mass of any electrons and calculate the atom’s mass based on the number of protons and neutrons alone.  Each electron has a negative charge equal to the positive charge of a proton. In uncharged, neutral atoms, the number of electrons orbiting the nucleus is equal to the number of protons inside the nucleus. The atom will have no charge because the positive and negative charges cancel each other out.  Most of an atom's volume, greater than 99 percent, is empty space. With all this empty space, one might ask why solid objects do not just pass through one another. The reason this does not occur is due to the electrons that surround all atoms. Electrons are negatively charged, and negative charges of different objects repel one another, preventing this from occurring.  Atomic Number and Mass Atoms of each element contain a unique number of protons and electrons. The number of protons determines an element’s atomic number, which scientists use to distinguish one element from another. For example, hydrogen has an atomic number of 1, meaning it has one proton. Helium has an atomic number of 2, meaning it has two protons in its nucleus (Figure 2.2). All atoms of a particular element will have the same number of protons. The number of neutrons an atom has is variable. Isotopes are different atoms of the same element that vary only in their number of neutrons. Together, the number of protons and neutrons determines an element’s atomic mass number (Figure 2.5). Note that we disregard the small contribution of mass from electrons in calculating the mass number. We can use this approximation of mass to easily calculate how many neutrons an element has by subtracting the number of protons from the mass number.  An element’s isotopes will all have slightly different mass numbers. When scientists determine the atomic mass of an element, they take the mean of the mass numbers for all its naturally occurring isotopes. Often, the resulting number contains a fraction. For example, the atomic mass of chlorine (Cl) is 35.45 because chlorine is composed of several isotopes, most with atomic mass 35 (17 protons and 18 neutrons) and some with atomic mass 37 (17 protons and 20 neutrons).  Carbon has an atomic number of six, and two stable isotopes with mass numbers of twelve and thirteen, respectively. Its relative atomic mass is 12.011  Isotopes As mentioned above, isotopes are different forms of an element that have the same number of protons but a different number of neutrons. Hydrogen-1 contains one proton, zero neutrons, and one electron. Hydrogen-2, also called deuterium, has one proton, one neutron, and one electron (Figure 2.6). These two alternate forms of hydrogen are isotopes. Some elements, such as carbon, potassium, and uranium, have naturally occurring isotopes. Carbon-12 contains six protons, six neutrons, and six electrons; therefore, it has a mass number of 12. Carbon-14 contains six protons, eight neutrons, and six electrons; its atomic mass is 14. Some isotopes are unstable and will lose neutrons, other subatomic particles, or energy to form more stable atoms. These are called radioactive isotopes or radioisotopes.  Carbon-14 (14C) is a naturally occurring radioisotope that is created in the atmosphere by cosmic rays. This is a continuous process, so more 14C is always being created. As a living organism develops, the relative level of 14C in its body is equal to the concentration of 14C in the atmosphere. When an organism dies, it is no longer ingesting 14C, so the ratio will decline. 14C decays to 14N by a process called beta decay; it gives off energy in a relatively slow process (Figure 2.7).  After approximately 5,730 years, only one-half of the starting concentration of 14C will have been converted to 14N. The time it takes for half of the original concentration of an isotope to decay to its more stable form is called its half-life. Because the half-life of 14C is long, it is used to age dead organisms or objects, such as fossils.  CAREER CONNECTION - Interventional Radiologist The controlled use of radioisotopes has advanced medical diagnosis and treatment of disease. Interventional radiologists are physicians who treat disease by using minimally invasive techniques involving radiation. Many conditions that could once only be treated with a lengthy and traumatic operation can now be treated non-surgically, reducing the cost, pain, length of hospital stay, and recovery time for patients. For example, in the past, the only options for a patient with one or more tumors in the liver were surgery and chemotherapy. Some liver tumors, however, are difficult to access surgically, and others could require the surgeon to remove too much of the liver. Chemotherapy is also highly toxic to the liver, and certain tumors do not respond well. In some cases, an interventional radiologist can treat the tumors by disrupting the patient's blood supply. In this procedure, called radioembolization, the radiologist accesses the liver with a fine needle, threaded through one of the patient’s blood vessels. The radiologist then inserts tiny radioactive “seeds” into the blood vessels that supply the tumors. In the days and weeks following the procedure, the radiation emitted from the seeds destroys the vessels and directly kills the tumor cells in the vicinity of the treatment.  